		The Adventure

Hail, Noble One! Our land is in need of a stalwart 
hero, one who will brave perils horrific to consider. A plague 
has befallen the Realm, a scourge is upon the land!  Our 
villages lie sacked, ruinous mounds of ashes where once trod 
peasants stout of heart and sound of mind, where once lay 
fields of grain and fruit, where kine and fowl grew fat upon 
the bounties of our fair Sosaria. All manner of wicked and 
vile creatures prey upon our people and ravage the land. 'Tis 
the doing of one so evil that the very earth trembles at the 
mention of his name. 
	Mondain the wizard hath wrought his malice well. 
Our nobles bicker amongst themselves, and each hath retired 
to the confines of his keep in hopes of watching the downfall 
of his rivals.  Verily, the Evil One hath heaped indignity upon 
curse by releasing upon the Realm a host of creatures and 
beasts so bloodthirsty and wicked that our defenseless people 
fall as grain before the reaper's scythe. These denizens of the 
underworld hold sway over all that can be surveyed, save for 
the strongholds of the nobles besotted with their own 
ambition. Nowhere in our once peaceful country may a 
traveler find safe passage or lodging, save in the keeps of the 
self-proclaimed kings - - and they demand hard labors for 
their indulgences.
	Only the young Lord British remains steadfast in the 
vision of a peaceful and united Sosaria.  In his castle and his 
towne the pure of heart will find an ally and replenishment 
for the needs of one who hath chosen to fight for the Realm.
Aid us in ridding our land of the scourge that hath 
befallen us, 0 Noble One.  We beseech thee, for without thine 
aid we shall surely perish before the onslaught of the 
maleficent necromancer.  Slay the evil Mondain!


		Fellowship

The lands of Sosaria are populated by a diversity of races as 
varied as the elements. From the tiniest bobbit to the most 
towering human, our folk show a strength of character 
unknown in other parts of the world. Until the coming of the 
foul Mondain, our folk lived in harmony and worked together 
in the true spirit of comrade-ship. The principle inhabitants of 
Sosaria are:

Human: Endowed with a natural intellect higher than any 
other race, the humans are the backbone of Sosarian society.  
Found in all walks of life, they are strong of body and of 
unexcelled spirit.

Elf: Shorter than their human counterparts by the span of 
three hands, the elves of Sosaria are slight of build and swift 
of movement. Their superior natural agility makes them 
excellent musicians and clever thieves.  At home amongst the 
trees of the deepest forest or in the alleyways of the capital, 
The Sosarian Elf makes a stalwart companion and a relentless 
foe.

Dwarf: Mountainfolk and legendary miners, the dwarves of 
Sosaria stand but half a human's height, yet often outweigh 
slender elves.  They are matchless in courage and possess an 
inordinate endowment of natural strength.  Never accept the 
Sosarian Dwarf's challenge to wrestle for drinks in a tavern, 
unless thy supply of gold be endless and thy generosity ample.

Bobbit: A small and gentle race, the Sosarian Bobbits are 
believed to have come to our Realm from a distant place. 
They are said to favour mountainside meadows and the 
serenity of forest clearings. Their diminutive height being 
even less than that of a dwarf, they shun any task that 
involves hard, physical labour, preferring instead the pursuits 
of study and contemplation. Bobbits are naturally weak yet 
possess a serenity indicative of profound wisdom.


		Professions

Whilst the professions practiced by our folk are numerous, 
there are but four courses of action that may be followed by 
the novice adventurer. These are:

Fighter -- The rigorous training involved in learning to 
become a fighter results in a stronger, more agile adventurer. 
The knowledge acquired during this period permits the 
fighter to use virtually every kind of weapon that might be 
found in Sosaria.

Cleric -- A profession suited to those who are of an 
introspective nature, the study of the ways of the cleric 
requires patience and results in a good deal of wisdom.  Such 
is their calm and concentration that at no time will the proper 
spell cast by a cleric fail to attain its desired result.

Wizard -- To become a wizard in our Realm, one must study 
long and diligently, poring over ancient writings and dusty 
tomes.  Mastery of the arcane arts comes not easily, yet such 
training hones the intellect to a superior edge! The fruits all 
the long years of discipline are deemed to be worth the effort, 
however, for only the wizard may purchase the necessary 
supplies for the casting of the more powerful enchantments.

Thief -- Whilst not a profession held in the highest esteem 
among those charged with maintaining the public order, 
thieving is a trade that often serves the adventurer well. Many 
of the explorer's finds are guarded by clever and devious traps 
that require nimble fingers and a dexterous hand.  Larceny 
and the opening of locks comes much easier for the thief than 
for other mortals, for they who follow this occupation are 
endowed with exceptional agility.


		Castles & Townes

Sosaria is a land dotted with the castles of the nobility of the 
Realm and with numerous townes wherein the traveler might 
purchase supplies and provender. Townes and castles may be 
entered freely, but woe to the one who foolishly is 
apprehended in an act of thievery, for the public order is 
maintained here by burly Guards who fear none. 
Each castle is held by a noble, the King of his 
particular region.  Visit these local rulers, they have much to 
offer the adventurer.  The castles are often built of stone and 
peopled with merchants, courtiers, guards and fools. Beware 
of the jesters, for although they amuse, they may also deceive.


		Shoppes

The merchant class of Sosaria is the mainstay of the Realm's 
economy. All manner of trade goods -- foodstuffs and the 
handiwork local artisans -- can be found in the towne and 
castle shoppes.  An adequate supply of gold will help to equip 
the adventurer with everything from rations to the most 
esoteric of weapons. Some of the more common emporiums 
include:

Armoury -- Tailors of protective garments await your 
pleasure in the amouries of Sosaria. The finest craftsmen in 
the Realm will swiftly fit out the adventurer in a suit made of 
worked leather or metal. Price varies according to the level of 
protection offered by the suit of armour.

Weapons -- The workers of metal in Sosaria know no peer.  
From a simple carved mace, reinforced with good iron, to the 
most exquisitely crafted greatswords of tempered steel, the 
weapons found in the shoppes of the Realm are truly works of 
art.  'Tis rumored that some of the arms one may find in the 
distant reaches of our land surpass belief.

Transportation -- Whilst one may travel throughout much of 
the Realm afoot, there are alternate means of transport that 
make short journeys pass more quickly, and longer journeys 
feasible where once such voyages seemed unattainable. 
Common modes of travel include the use of horses and of sea-
going vessels. Uncommon modes of travel are also rumoured 
to exist.

Magic -- A once-forgotten discipline, the study of magic has 
enjoyed a renaissance since the coming of the evil Mondain.  
Many hold the belief that sorcery is indeed needed to combat 
sorcery. The practitioner of the arcane arts can purchase the 
needed tools of the trade in various magic shoppes scattered 
throughout the Realm.

Food -- None can live without sustenance. The food shoppes 
of Sosaria provide the focal population with fresh produce 
and meats, while the adventurer can find provisions therein 
that will last for weeks in the wilderness with no special care.

Pubs -- The people of our land are not without a certain 
fondness for strong spirits and lively companionship.  Most 
settlements are graced with public houses where a tankard of 
strong ale from the region of Trinsic or a flagon of the best 
Jhelom mead may be had for but a few coins. Many of the 
people found in these taverns are quite friendly, and the ones 
serving the drinks are often fountains of wisdom and gossip.

Dungeons
Our land is an ancient one, where strange and wondrous 
beings once walked the earth and civilizations rose and fell.  
There are numerous underground labyrinths to be found 
throughout Sosaria, the handiwork of unspeakable creatures 
and unknown forces. These mazes have became the dwellings 
of many of the horrors unleashed by Mondain upon our poor 
land.  Indeed, the lowest depths of some of these hellholes 
contain creatures that make even the staunchest warriors 
blanch and tremble.
Yet these subterranean passages also contain caches 
of the ill-gotten gains of the predations of Mondain's minions. 
An intrepid adventurer can finance many an expedition with 
the spoils of a careful foray in the dungeons of Sosaria.  
Hearken to my words: The use of extreme caution is needed 
when exploring underground. The corridors of the dungeons 
are lined with the bones of explorers who overestimated their 
abilities!


		Starwalking

Before the archmage Mondain can be defeated, one's mettle 
will first have to be tested in the farthest reaches of the 
heavens. 'Tis said that the Evil One has formed alliances with 
starwalking monsters of unparalleled savagery. These 
malicious creatures stand poised to swoop down upon our 
people and devastate them. The need to slay the vile wizard is 
redoubled in the face of this threat.
Should a champion emerge from the mists of legend, 
the means by which to combat this menace from the sky will 
appear -- so say the prophets. The  legends which foretell of 
this hero include a number of writings and several ballads 
sung by the bards of our Realm.  Among the more recent 
discoveries pertaining to the coming of the starwalkers is an 
arcane manuscript, found on the foothills of Mt. Drash. Since 
it appears to hold instructions for the use of some form of 
transport, it has been broadcast throughout the land in hopes 
that it might prove useful to one engaged in the quest to rid 
Sosaria of Mondain. The substance of the document is as 
follows:

                          "In the heavens, each 
                       vehicle has the. means to 
                        control rotation, as well 
                            as thrust and retro 
                        (reverse thrust). In the 
                       front view mode one can 
                      turn left, right, climb, and 
                                      dive.

                   'The starways are divided into 
                 49 sectors on a 7 X 7 grid. In the 
                   top view mode one can see all 
                 within the current sector. A long 
                range scan may be obtained by use 
                of the 'Inform' control. Consult the 
                  Pilot's Reference Manual for the 
                 symbols needed to interpret a scan.

                      "One can jump to the next 
                  sector in the direction of current 
                   travel by using the Hyperjump 
                      capability of the vehicle.
                  "Docking with starbases can 
                be attained at any of the unused 
               docking ports and should be made 
                   at slow speeds while headed 
                 directly into the port opening. A 
                  docking fee is required. Upon 
               docking, a 'Base Command' query 
                   will be issued and the pilot is 
                expected to indicate the direction 
              toward the next vehicle that will be 
                                     used.
                     "Reentry takes place when 
                your ship passes over the lands of 
                 Sosaria.  NOTE: Only the shuttle 
                craft has heat shields. Any vehicle 
               will incinerate if it collides with a 
                                     star.
                      "One may encounter and 
                   engage in combat with hostile 
                    beings in the heavens. Once 
               combat has begun, the pilot cannot 
                return to the top view mode until 
                all enemy craft have been driven 
               from the current sector or the pilot 
                has chosen to hyperjump to the 
                  next sector.  IMPORTANT: 
              Changing from front view mode to 
               top view mode at high speeds will 
                 surely result in a fatal collision.  
                Be wary of fuel levels and shield 
                  condition.  A ship without fuel 
               drifts forever and a depleted shield 
                           spells certain death.

Our most learned scholars have translated the 
document into the common tongue of the Realm, but certain 
terms and phrases have no meaning even to the most erudite 
sage. Nonetheless, such is our desire to be rid of the scourge 
of Mondain that we make this information available to all.


		The Magical Arts

As mentioned elsewhere in this manuscript, the practice of 
magic had once died out in Sosaria. The power of the mystic 
tradition proved too corrupting for the general populace and 
the lords of the land decreed that all who dabbled in sorcery 
were to be banished. 'Twas not until the coming of Mondain 
the wicked that our scholars once again unearthed the dusty 
tomes that contained the records of the once flourishing 
arcane arts, and set about to retrain adepts in the use of 
enchantments. Our leaders realize that once the discipline of 
magic is reawakened, it shall never again be put to rest.  Such 
is our plight that even the most dreaded of the arts is laid bare 
to all who will try to learn it and who swear to use its powers 
to combat the spread of Mondain's vile influence.
While those naturally born to the practice of sorcery, 
who can invent their own enchantments and forge new 
ground in the arts, have yet to emerge as powerful wizards in 
their own right, a certain progress has been made.  There are 
four artifacts available to the budding mage which will 
enhance the ability to weave enchantments: Staff, Wand, 
Amulet, and Triangle. The latter is a magical sword that may 
also serve as a weapon.  Several powerful spells, which will 
cost the buyer in both gold and experience, may be purchased 
in the magic shoppes of Sosaria.

These include:

Blink--The ability to be physically transported a short 
     distance while underground.
Create -- The ability to create a wall of magical force directly 
     in front of the spellcaster.
Destroy -- The ability to remove a wall of magical force that 
     blocks the spellcaster's path.  
Kill -- An enchantment hurled at a foe in front of the 
     spellcaster.  If successful, this cantrip will destroy the 
     opponent.
Ladder Down -- This enchantment creates a magical ladder 
     which permits the spellcaster to descend to the next level        
     of a dungeon.
Ladder Up -- This enchantment creates a magical ladder 
     which permits the spellcaster to ascend to the next level of 
     a dungeon.
Magic Missile -- The ability to strike a foe with a blast of 
     magical force. The more skilled and well equipped the 
     spellcaster, the greater the damage inflicted by the blast.
Open -- This spell permits the opening of coffins at no risk to 
     the spellcaster by magically disarming any traps.
Prayer -- The ability, when in dire straits, to call upon one's 
     personal deity in hopes of finding a way out of a pressing 
     dilemma. Should be used only when the spellcaster is in 
     serious need of divine aid.
Unlock -- This spell permits the opening of chests at no risk 
     to the spellcaster by magically disarming any traps.


The Bestiary
The Realm of Sosaria is populated by a variety of creatures, 
both natural and unnatural. The latter group hath been on the 
increase since the coming of the Evil One. Through the 
efforts of a posterity minded few, a collection of names and 
descriptions of the more common beasts hath been compiled 
and may be perused herein.

Archer, Hidden -- So lacking in courage are the minions of 
the vile Mondain that his Archers only ply their trade from 
hiding places high in the treetops of the forests of Sosaria. 
Their aim, nonetheless, is accurate and many a traveler has 
died without ever knowing whence came the deadly rain of 
barbed shafts.

Balron -- Huge, leather-skinned daemon lords, the Balron are 
perhaps the most fearsome of the evil minions of Mondain.  
Armed with vicious barbed whips and the ability to cast 
devastating fire balls at their victims, these winged scions of 
Hell have proved to be the nemesis of the flower of Sosarian 
knighthood.

Bat, Giant -- Although the Sosarian Giant Bat is but a dumb 
brute, this Large cousin of the more common vampire bat 
found in other lands is indeed a menace to those unfortunate 
enough to disturb its subterranean slumber. The Giant Bat 
lives on a diet of animal blood and is not adverse to feasting 
on adventurers.

Bear -- The Hill Bear towers over the tallest human and is 
armed with saber-like claws capable of rending even the 
stoutest plate armour in a single blow. The species was first 
sighted on the slopes of Mt. Drash, but hath since spread 
throughout the land. These creatures are extremely ill-
tempered and will attack without provocation.

Carrion Creeper -- These loathsome worms inhabit the 
deeper reaches of most dungeons, where they feed on the 
corpses of any luckless creatures they encounter. The 
numerous legs on their segmented bodies are equipped with 
small barbs that allow them to move quickly on walls and 
ceilings, as well as along corridors. Carrion Creepers should 
be avoided at all costs.

Cyclops -- A race of belligerent, one-eyed giants, the Cyclops 
dwelt in Sosaria long before humans ever landed on these 
shores. Driven underground many years ago, the Cyclops  
long to return to the surface and drive humans into the sea. 
Beware, for they will attack any adventurers on sight.

Daemon -- Fierce, bat-winged horrors armed with cruel 
talons and barbed tridents, Daemons were unknown in 
Sosaria hitherto the advent of Mondain.  Drinkers of human 
souls, Daemons are said to relish the screams of tortured 
humans above all else.

Dark Knight -- Such is the corrupting influence of the foul 
Mondain that even the most virtuous of Sosarian chivalry are 
subject to fall under his sway.  The land is now befouled with 
Dark Knights - predatory warriors who seek to waylay 
innocent travelers and to rob them of their hard earned goods.

Dragon Turtle -- These fire-breathing, aquatic dragons 
inhabit the seas around Sosaria and are considered an even 
greater menace to mariners than the winds of a typhoon. They 
are protected by a shell tougher than enchanted plate armour, 
and thus are extraordinarily difficult to defeat in combat.

Ettin -- Travelers in the forests of our land have oft been 
fooled into thinking they have drawn near to a group of 
fellow explorers when they encounter an Ettin, for these two-
headed monstrosities have been known to carry on heated 
discussions with themselves. An Ettin invariably abandons its 
dialogue when it hath the chance to attack an adventurer.

Gelatinous Cube -- Called 'dungeon-sweeper' by some, the 
Gelatinous Cube is a subterranean dweller that roams 
corridors in search of food. Their bodies are composed of a 
clear, corrosive, jelly-like substance which renders them 
difficult to see, but they may sometimes be detected by the 
remnants of armour or debris contained within them. They 
are omnivores, digesting anything they find after absorbing it 
into their massive bodies. Contact with a Gelatinous Cube 
hath -ruined the armour of many a hardy warriors.

Gremlins -- Mischievous kin of the trolls and lizardmen, 
Gremlins are underground creatures of voracious appetite. A 
favorite diversion is to stealthily approach unwary travelers 
and pilfer their food rations. Many an adventurer hath been 
consigned to death by starvation below the surface of Sosaria 
as a result of the antics of these creatures.

Hood -- When the corrupt influence of the unspeakable 
Mondain spread throughout the Realm, even some of our 
stalwart peasants fell under the sway of the evil wizard.  
These warped individuals now roam the countryside attacking 
travelers. While unskilled in the use of arms, they nonetheless 
pose quite a nuisance to adventurers.

Invisible Seeker -- Among the most dangerous of the 
denizens of the catacombs below our land is the Invisible 
Seeker. None have ever seen one of these horrific slayers for 
they are -- as their name implies - unseeable. Their presence 
is usually first detected when open wounds suddenly begin 
appearing on the body of a victim. They are, however, 
susceptible to harm from most weapons.

Knight -- Like their forest dwelling counterparts the Dark 
Knights, the predatory Knights of Sosaria are warriors who 
have forsaken the ways of Chivalry for the paths of Evil. They 
are fierce opponents and must be treated with care if one is to 
avoid an untimely demise.

Lich -- The Lich is an evil spellcaster who, through the 
necromantic arts, hath entered a state of living death in order 
to prolong an unholy reign on earth.  Woe to the explorer 
who stumbles upon the lair of a lich, for the undead mage will 
guard its domain fiercely and attack without hesitation.

Lizard Man -- When Mondain first came to our land he 
performed unspeakable experiments with his servitors and the 
fierce reptiles that inhabit some of the streams and rivers in 
the south of our land. The result was the Lizard Man, a being 
both reptilian and human in a single body, armed with cruel 
teeth and a disposition to match its appearance.
Mimic -- Beware the treacherous Mimic, for it hath been the 
doom of many a dungeon explorer. Disguised as a tempting 
treasure chest, the Mimic patients awaits the overly-curious 
adventurer. When the victim makes as if to examine the 
chest, the Mimic attacks with a ferocity unmatched.

Mind Whipper -- Truly hideous, the Mind Whipper is a 
being with the body of a human, a face that resembled 
nothing so much as the underside of a squid, and an 
unquenchable thirst for the mental energies of its victim. The 
few who have survived encounters with Mind Whippers have  
emerged as babbling lunatics, their minds flayed from their 
souls by the relentless onslaught of these terrible creatures.

Minotaur -- As mentioned before, the evil Mondain 
experimented ceaselessly with the crossbreeding of man and 
beast in an effort to create the ultimate soldier.  As if the 
creation of the dread Lizard Man was not enough, the vile 
wizard also mated the famed Baratarian fighting bull with 
some of his followers, resulting in the Minotaur -- a horror 
that walks on two legs like a man, but which has the head and 
the cruel horns of a bull.

Necromancer -- The Necromancer is a mage whose specialty 
is the practice of the arcane arts that pertain to the dead.  
Practitioners of such a morbid specialty were naturally drawn 
to the foul Mondain as jackals are to the carrion of the plains.

Ness Creature -- The seas surrounding Sosaria are home to a 
number of beasts, among which numbers the dread Ness 
Creature. For many years these reptilian behemoths were 
thought to be naught but the workings of the overwrought 
imaginations of mariners. The sinking of the frigate 
Pembroke in plain view of a small armada hath disproven this 
belief.

Orc -- Small, pig-visaged humanoids, the Orcs were the 
vanguard of Mondain's first advance. Tribal by nature, they 
are sub-human at best, just a slight cut above true bestiality. 
They abhor all things human and cultured and will lay waste 
to anything fashioned by human hands. 'Tis said that they 
relish the taste of human flesh.

Pirates -- The pirates that infest the coastal waters of Sosaria 
are the scourge of the honest mariner. They ply the waterways 
seeking unarmed merchant ships to plunder, and often press 
the younger crew members into service as marauders. Once 
engaged, a pirate vessel and its crew will battle to the end, 
seeking no quarter and offering none.

Ranger -- Alas!  Even the noble Ranger, preserver of the 
woodlands and keeper of the forests, hath fallen under the 
sway of dark Mondain! These matchless trailblazers once 
watched over the preserves of the Sosarian nobility, but as 
Mondain's treachery took hold, many of them forsook their 
old ways and became predators themselves. He who is 
pursued by a Ranger must turn and make a stand, for once on 
a trail a Ranger will never give it up.

Rat, Giant -- The underground passages of the Realm are 
prowled by oversized rodents, the result of Mondain's 
necromancy and an abundance of food in the form of victims 
of the Evil One's minions. The Sosarian Giant Rat is a vicious 
predator and should not be taken lightly.

Skeleton -- The progeny of Necromancers and undead liches, 
Skeletons are the animated corpses of dead warriors from 
which the flesh hath withered and fallen away. They fight 
tirelessly in an effort to carry out the bidding of their dark 
masters.

Spider, Giant -- Few moments hold more terror for the 
intrepid explorer than when a Giant Spider, venom dripping 
from its fangs, is encountered in the corridor of a 
subterranean labyrinth. These creatures are dazzling in their 
agility and tireless in their search for prey. Fight well, or face 
a paralyzing sting and the fate of becoming a living hatchery 
for their young.

Squid, Giant -- Sosarian mariners swap legends of the 
Kraken, or Giant Squid, in every pub in every port of the 
Realm. These monstrous, creatures have been known to rise 
from the ocean depths, seize a vessel in their long tentacles, 
and drag the hapless vessel and its crew to a watery grave in 
the space of but a half-dozen heartbeats.

Tangler -- Looking for all the world as naught but a vine-
covered tree stump, the Tangler lurks in subterranean 
corridors, waiting to ensnare explorers of the underground. 
Once a Tangler hath ensnared an adventurer in its tentacles, 
it will hold the victim fast until starvation ends the struggle. 
The monstrosity then feasts on the corpse.

Thief -- Long before the coming of Mondain, the common 
cutpurse was a plague to travelers in Sosaria. Lurking in 
alleyways, poised behind trees, and skulking in dungeon 
corridors, these villains are always ready to relieve innocent 
citizens of their valuables and their lives. 'Tis a service to 
your fellow Sosarian to exterminate a Thief whenever 
possible.

Trent -- Native to the woodlands of Sosaria, the evil Trent 
seems like an ordinary oak tree until one approaches near 
enough to be ensnared in the grasp of its pliant branches. 
Once it hath crushed the life from the victim, the Trent then 
devours it, leaving no trace of it's prey to warn other travelers.

Viper -- Since before the dawn of civilization, the race of 
serpents hath roamed the land. From the most harmless 
garden snake to the giant constrictors, these legless creatures 
have always inspired fear in the human race. In the case of 
the Viper, this fear is well-founded. These viscous reptiles 
strike fiercely and frequently at all who stray too closely. 
Their venom-laden fangs being a swift yet painful death.

Wandering Eyes -- Many a dungeon seeker hath been 
startled to enter a darkened chamber and be greeted by a 
number of eyes staring out of the murky blackness. Stare not 
long, for the Wandering Eyes weave a hypnotic spell that 
entrances even the most strong-willed  and leaves one 
helpless before the magical onslaught that inevitably follows 
mesmerization.

Warlock -- Rogue practitioners of the magical arts, Warlocks 
are the evil servitors of Mondain. The Foul One hath trained 
them in the casting of bolts of mystic energy and sent them 
forth to wreak havoc among the populace. Slay them if ye 
can, for the arcane arts should never be used for wicked 
purpose.

Wraith -- Summoned from the nethermost regions of Hell by 
Mondain's perverse enchantments, Wraiths are the restless 
souls of dead clerics. Once on the material plane, they drift 
about seeking potential converts to the discipline of Evil. 
Since one must first die in order to be converted, 'tis strongly 
advised that their enticements be resisted.

Zorn -- Little is known of the mysterious Zorn. 'Tis a creature 
that not only defies logic, but that seems to defy the very 
Laws of nature. It can burrow through anything and is 
completely omnivorous. In battle it seems to generate far 
more force than one would estimate possible from a creature 
of its size. When slain, the zorn quickly evaporates, thus none 
have ever been studied closely.


		Getting Started

To start Ultima 1, click on your Windows 95 Start button, 
click programs, Ultima Collection, then Ultima 1.  In order to 
exit Ultima 1 you must press Ctrl-Alt-Del one time, highlight 
Ultima 1 on the menu and click on end task.


		Character Generation

Upon typing 'A' at the main menu, the character generation 
screen appears.

1.    Follow the instructions for distributing thy 30 
       available points among the five attributes:

Strength-Determines the severity of thy blows.
Agility-	Determines the probability of  successfully striking a 
foe, as well as the probability of avoiding attacks.
Charisma-Affects the selling price of one's possessions at 
shoppes.
Wisdom-Determines the reliability of spell casting, and the 
purchase price of the spells themselves.
Intelligence-Affects both the potency of offensive spells and 
the purchase price of goods in shoppes.


2.	Select a race, each of which has certain advantages:

Human		+5 Intelligence
Elf		+5 Agility
Dwarf		+5 Strength
Bobbit		-5 Strength; +10 Wisdom


3.	Specify: Male or Female

 
4.  Now, select the class thou dost wish thy character to be:

Fighter		+10 Strength; +10 Agility
Cleric		+10 Wisdom
Wizard		+10 Intelligence
Thief		+10 Agility


5.  Finally, name thy character (limited to 14 letters).


6.  When asked if thou dost wish to Save thy character, type 
'Y'.  Thy character will be saved to a roster on thy 
program disk.  But beware! Save not but 4 characters or 
thou wilt meet with peril.  When finished saving thy 
character(s), type 'B' to begin playing.  Note that only one 
character may adventure at a time.


Commands

A)	Attack - Attempt to harm thine opponents with 
whatever thou dost currently hold.  Must be followed 
with a direction key, unless thou art in a dungeon.

B)	Board - Board a horse, raft, frigate or other form of 
transport - if thou art standing upon it.

C)	Cast - Cast a spell.  Thou must first commit the 
intended spell to memory by means of the R)eady 
command.

D)	Drop - Dispose of any item no longer desired whilst 
in a towne or castle.  This action is quite irrevocable.

E)	Enter - Enter the towne, castle, dungeon or other 
landmark upon which thou art standing.

F)	Fire - Ye may fire upon foes using the guns of your 
ship, or any other armed vehicle.

G)	Get - Pick up items which thou art standing adjacent 
to while in castles and other places.

H)	Hyper Jump - Enable thee to travel at faster-than-
light speed to other stellar sectors - if the means are 
available...

I)	Inform & Search - Reveals the names of places and 
things that may be E)ntered.  Also permits detection 
of secret doors and passages in dungeons, and may 
grant a view of surrounding areas in some future 
crafts.

K)	Klimb - Ladders in dungeons may lead to fortune or 
doom; by means of this command thou canst use 
them.

N)	Noise - Used to turn sound on or off.

O)	Open - Reveal the contents of a coffin in a dungeon.

Q)	Quit (and save to disk) - Use this command to stop 
playing (from the outside world only).  Upon 
resuming thy quest, all will be as it was.

R)	Ready - Equip thyself with a certain weapon, wear a 
suit of armour or learn a magic spell.  This must be 
performed prior to using an item.

S)	Steal - May be used behind the unwatched counters 
of shoppes and in dark caches in castles.  Beware, 
for the guards frown on this sort of behaviour.

T)	Transact - Conduct business with merchants or 
kings.

U)	Unlock - Open cells in castles or chests in dungeons.  
Damger tends to follow.

V)	View Change - Switches the view in modern crafts 
between front and top viewing modes.

X)	X-it - Leave behind or dismount current craft and 
travel on foot.

Z)	Ztats - Shows vital statistics, possessions and spells.  
Also useful to temporarily stop the passage of time in 
the game.

Spacebar)  Pass - Causes the passage of time (and 
consumption of food).


Movement

The direction keys for ULTIMA I correspond to the arrow 
keys on the IBM PC. The arrangement of the keys is as a 
compass; indication directions and movement to the north, 
south, east and west. In dungeons, the north and south keys 
move thee forward or turn thee around, respectively. In some 
future crafts, these same keys cause an increase or decrease in 
forward velocity.

Be sure the "Num Lock" light is off above the keypad so that 
the arrow keys are enabled.


NOTE:  Thou canst attack in two different ways. For 
example, if thou wanted to attack to the north, thou couldst 
type:

1.  'A', 'up arrow', or:
2.  Depress Num Lock and press the 'up arrow' (this option 
only available on the IBM PC)


Play Screen

Thou art seen here standing upon a grassy meadow with a 
castle and towne to the west and a marauding Hood coming 
toward thee from the east.

HITS is a measure of mortality - the bodily damage that canst 
be sustained before death. Thy hit points may range up to 
9999.

FOOD is vital to survival. If this value reaches 0 thou wilt 
die.

EXP is the measure of thy experience. Every victory increases 
thine experience.

COIN is the measure of thy wealth in copper pence, silver 
pieces and fabulous golden crowns of the Realms.

ULTIMA I Walkthrough
      by Lori Branham

Lands of Lord British:
When you first start you are somewhat south and east of 
Britain and Lord British's Castle. Go to Britain first, once 
there go to the weapons shop and buy a mace. If you have 
enough money then go to the armor shop and buy chain 
armor.  Leave and enter the nearby castle.  
Talk to the king and write down the quest.  To solve 
this quest you will need either a boat or an aircar.  To gain 
the required funds you will have to kill creatures.  The best 
way to do this is to go into a dungeon and fight the creatures 
there.  This will not only gain you the funds but increase your 
hit points as well.  The mines of  Mt. Drash are a good place 
to start, they are just northeast and on the other side of the 
mountains.  
Then begin to head northwest to the Castle of the 
Lost King.  Along the way you can stop in Paws to buy more 
food or an axe if you have the funds.  The Lost King will ask 
you to kill a Gelatinous Cube.  While you are here if you have 
extra funds buy hit points from the king.  As this quest is 
easier than Lord British's quest, this one should be done first.  
Head east to the dungeon of  Montor.  Save before entering 
and try to fight your way down to the third floor where you 
may find a cube (you may need to enter and exit the cave 
many times to gain experience and gold so that you may 
make it all the way and survive.)  If necessary, head back to 
Paws or Britain to get armor, weapons or spells(not 
recommended unless you are a wizard, as they are too 
expensive at this point.)
Another option is to go into the Mines of Mt. Drash, 
they work just as well, and use Moon as your "base".  At  the 
end of this quest, you should have reached level 2 and have 
both the Great Sword and Plate Mail.  Go back to the Lost 
King, and he will give you a red gem.  
Now, back to Lord British's quest.  Go back to 
Britain and buy an aircar (and, if you can afford it, a Reflect 
suit.)  If you don't have enough cash you can go back into one 
of the dungeons and battle the creatures again until you have 
enough funds.  Once you have the aircar fly northeast to the 
Land of Danger and Despair.  On an island of the northwest 
coast lies the grave.  Enter it and complete the quest.  Go 
back to Britain .  You have now completed 1/4 of the game.

For the remainder of the game, do a bit of exploring. 
Just remember to buy food every time it falls below 100.  Also 
when you can buy hit points from the kings and every time 
you see a sign post, enter it these contain abilities and 
weapons.  That will help out later.


Lands of the Feudal Lords:
Fly to the Castle Rondorin and enter it.  He'll tell you to kill a 
Carrion Creeper.  This can be found on the 5th or 6th floor of 
any dungeon.  But first, head to the Castle Brataria.  The 
quest here is to find the southern sign post.  This should be no 
problem with the aircar..  Just fly east to the Lands of the 
Dark Unknown.  It  is on the northern coast, enter it and 
complete the quest. Fly back to the castle.  Beating the 
Carrion Creeper will be too difficult at this point, so don't try 
it. 
Fly southwest to the Pillars of the Argonauts and 
enter it, you should get a weapon.  From here,  fly south to the 
Pillars of Ozymandias, and enter it, here you should gain 
wisdom.  Continue flying from one to the other (with 
occasional food stops if necessary).  Do this until you get the 
blaster, you should also have almost full Wisdom as an added 
bonus (you could have used any of the other Pillars, these just 
happen to be closest.)
Flying north and slightly east will take you to 
Scorpion Hole.  If you haven't gotten the reflect suit go and 
get it now.  Before you go, however, stop off in town and get 
6 ladder ups and 6 ladder downs.  Also,  sell all of the 
unneeded weapons you got while getting the blaster , with 
your cash go to the king and buy hit points.  This would be a 
good point to save your game, before entering the dungeon. 
When you enter a dungeon use the ladder down 
spells to descend quickly to the 5th floor, or the 6th if you 
don't find the Creeper on the 5th.  Quickly search for the 
Creeper, when you find one and have killed it, just use the 
ladder up spells to ascend quickly to the surface.  Return to 
the castle and receive the green gem.  Congratulations!  You 
are now 1/2 done.

From here on in, things will get more difficult.

Lands of the Dark Unknown:
Fly east to the Lands of the Dark Unknown and into the gulf 
where, on the east, The Black Dragon's Castle may be found.  
Talk to the King and he will tell you to kill a Lich.  Before 
you embark on this however, fly a hop skip and a jump to the 
northeast to the Castle of Olympus.  He will tell you to find 
the Pillar of Ozymandias.  You have already done that, so just 
fly back west to it and return quickly.
The Lich may be found on the 7th and 8th levels of a 
dungeon but, unfortunately, you are not yet powerful enough 
to even attempt it.  You need experience.  You can get a lot of 
experience by "rescuing" the princesses from the castles.  
Enter the Black Dragons Castle again and kill the 
jester.  Run to the prison and unlock the door, if it doesn't 
unlock, restore and try again.  Lead the princess outside and 
she will give you money and experience.  Now you can fly 
east to Stout and buy 8 ladder downs.  From there, go to Clear 
Lagoon for 8 ladder ups.  Trade in the remaining money for 
hit points and fly northwest to the End.  Use the magic to 
descend quickly, kill the Lich.  Once completed us the ladder 
ups to return quickly to the surface.  Fly back to the castle and 
to claim the gem.


Space:
The king will tell you that a princess will help a space ace 
through time.  Fly to Nassau, buy a space shuttle and a reflect 
suit if you don't have one yet.  (If you can't afford it you can 
either save another princess or fight in the dungeons.)  Before 
boarding the space shuttle make sure you have at least 1500-
3500 coin (since it costs 500 coin every time you dock to 
refuel.)  After boarding the shuttle, there will be a countdown 
and you'll find yourself in space.  
Sail *very carefully* into the nearby port.  The arrow 
keys on the keyboard will allow you to steer the ship.  You 
must pick a ship to take along,  either one will do.  The fat 
one holds more fuel, while the smaller one has more shields.  
Hit the letter "I" to get a sector scan.  The sectors with the 
letter "H" are occupied by enemy ships.  The "+" signs 
represent bases for refueling and the diamond shaped icons 
represent stars.  If an icon is flashing it means you are in that 
sector.  When you decide which sector you want to go hit "V" 
to switch to your ships overhead view.  Use the ships thrusters 
to get your ship moving in the direction of the sector you are 
trying to get to.  Hit "V" again to get a cockpit view and hit 
"H" to Hyperjump to that sector.  
You must become a space ace by destroying 20 
enemy ships.  Some helpful tips during combat:  enemy ships 
come in 2 varieties, one type flies in a direct line off the 
screen, these are a waste of fuel, it is best not to pursue them.  
The other type, however, tends to make more turns and stay 
on the screen longer, these are your best bet.  Keep tracking a 
ship until you see a visible passenger section (a center to the 
H), aim high and don't take foolish shots.  Stop and refuel 
often if necessary (3500 coin comes in handy for this 
strategy.)  Finally, don't bother trying to keep track of how 
many ships you have killed, when you reach 20 a message 
will appear on the screen informing you that you have 
reached the rank of space ace.  Now you are ready to return 
home.  Your planet is shown as a "+" towards the center of 
the screen when hitting "I" for sector scan.  When you have 
reached your sector, dock with the base, take the shuttle and 
return to the planet.


Lands of Danger and Despair:
Fly southwest to the Lands of Danger and Despair.  
(Remember that the king didn't say which princess.)  The first 
castle that you will find in that direction is Shamino's.  Enter 
it and get his quest.  He tells you to kill a Balron.  But before 
you do this however,  you must do a few other 
things....reenter the castle and kill the jester (again).  Using 
the key, open the cell door and escort the princess outside.  
She will tell you that there is a time machine to the 
northwest. (If she doesn't tell you about the time machine try 
any of the other castles, any should do.  The time machine 
will appear northwest of whichever castle the rescue works 
in.)   You can visit it, but you can't use it yet.
Fly southwest to the other castle here.  The White 
Dragon will instruct you to find the Tower of Knowledge.  No 
problem.  It  is off the northeast coast of the Lands of Lord 
British.  To kill the Balron just follow the same routine.  This 
time the target creature is on the 9th and 10th levels of any 
dungeon.  Buy 10 ladder downs in the nearby town, and 10 
ladder ups can be found to the west in Dextron.  A convenient 
dungeon to use would be on the island to the east.  When your 
done there return to Shamino.  He'll tell you to take 9 items 
from his store. (Why? Who knows?).  Just play along and do 
it.  Now you are almost ready for the final battle.

Almost Done!!!

1000 Years Ago:
You want to make sure you are armed with a Reflect Armor 
and a Blaster.  So, go ahead and sell all the other vehicles and 
equipment you are not using.  Then trade all of your money 
for hit points.  It is HIGHLY recommended that you have no 
less than 6000 hit points before you reach Mondain.  Head to 
the Time Machine and enter it.  You will be taken to 
Mondain's lab where he is making the gem.  Attack him 
constantly from afar.  STAY AWAY FROM THE GEM and 
while your at it STAY AWAY FROM THE FIERY 
EXPLOSIONS as well.  When he turns into a bat, chase him 
to the far left.  He won't be able to fly east while you are 
blocking and he will be stuck there.  Keep attacking until he 
falls unconscious, you may have to follow him very slowly 
and just keep attacking.  He may get back up, just attack him 
some more.  When he doesn't get up,  run over and get the 
gem.  You will take a lot of damage, so be careful.  If you 
don't beat the game right then and there, go back and pound 
Mondain for awhile.  He'll eventually die.  Congrats!  You 
have beaten the game!!!


